\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename basic.info
@settitle Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code

@c Define a new index for BASIC statements:
@defindex st

@c Macro overrides for plain text output
@ifinfo
@macro pi
pi
@end macro
@end ifinfo

@smallbook
@setchapternewpage on

@titlepage
@title{BASIC}
@subtitle{Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code}
@author{(This implementation)}
@author{by @email{trevin@@xmission.com, Trevin Beattie}}

@page
Copyleft @copyright{}MM Trevin Beattie

Parts of this manual and much researched data comes from the book
@cite{Basic Computer Games} edited by @w{David H.} Ahl and copyright
@copyright 1978 by Creative Computing (@sc{isbn}: 0-89480-052-3).  I
have tried to avoid copyright infringement by generalizing as much as
possible, but we must still give credit to this book as one of the best
sources of the original language.
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifinfo
@node Top, Introduction, , (dir)
@top Menu
@menu
* Introduction::
* General Syntax::
* Expressions::
* Statements::
* Comprison with Other BASICs::
@end menu

@end ifinfo

@node Introduction, General Syntax, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction

@cindex @sc{b.a.s.i.c.}, definition of

@sc{Basic} is one of the oldest high-level computer languages.  The
acronym @sc{b.a.s.i.c.}@: stands for ``Beginner's All-Purpose Symbolic
Instruction Code''; it was designed to be easy to learn and use, and (in
the author's opinion) is the best language for an aspiring programmer to
start learning how to tell the computer to do things.

@cindex interpreted

Since @sc{basic} is an interpreted language, it is also handy for those
`quick-and-dirty' jobs a user has need for from time to time.  Being
@dfn{interpreted} means that when you type a statement in, it is
executed right away.  This is more convenient than @dfn{compiled}
languages (such as `@sc{c}'), in which you must first write the whole
program in a text editor, then compile the program, before you can run
it.

@cindex Dartmouth @sc{basic}

Dartmouth is regarded as the original source of the @sc{basic}
programming language, written back in the late 50's or 60's for
mainframe computers such as the @sc{dec} @sc{pdp-11} at educational
institutions.  When microcomputers hit the market, @sc{basic} was ported
to these computers as the primary programming language, and its
popularity rose dramatically.

The only drawback to @sc{basic} was that when it was ported to these
dozen different microcomputers, the language was not standardized, so
small variations were introduced from one machine to the next.
(@xref{Comparison with Other BASICs} for details.)  In order to get a
@sc{basic} program from one computer to work on another, a user had to
understand the way @sc{basic} was implemented on both machines.  Also,
many microcomputer vendors added extensions to the @sc{basic} language
to take advantage of features available on their computers which were
different from any other machine.

@cindex standardization
@cindex True@sc{basic}
@cindex @sc{ansi}

A couple of decades later (in the late 80's, I think) the American
National Standards Institute (@sc{ansi}) attempted to address this
problem by defining a standard for the @sc{basic} language.  Around this
same time, however, some vendor had the bright idea of changing
@sc{basic} from an unstructured language to a structured one, which
involved (among other things) getting rid of all line numbers.  The
resulting language looks @emph{nothing} like any of the original
microcomputer @sc{basic}s, and (to my knowledge) there is only one
vendor which actually implements this standard: True@sc{basic}.

In this implementation, I have attempted to return to the original
implementations of @sc{basic} as much as possible, so that program
listings from the microcomputers of the 70's and early 80's can be
entered and run on modern systems with little or no modification.  The
following chapters describe the @sc{basic} language for the beginner,
with notes about this specific implementation, and a comparison of other
@sc{basic} implementations.

@node General Syntax, Lines, Introduction, Top
@chapter General Syntax

@node Lines, Statement Syntax, General Syntax, General Syntax
@section Lines

@stindex @code{REM}

A @sc{basic} programs consists of lines of instructions.  A @dfn{line}
starts with a number, which determines the order in which the
instructions are followed.  For an example, we will introduce the
@sc{basic} statement @code{REM}, which lets you add a `@sc{rem}ark' to
the program.  If you were to enter the following lines:

@cartouche
@example
@kbd{30 REM JACK FELL DOWN AND BROKE HIS CROWN
20 REM TO FETCH A PAIL OF WATER.
40 REM AND JILL CAME TUMBLING AFTER.
10 REM JACK AND JILL WENT UP THE HILL}
@end example
@end cartouche

@noindent
then @sc{basic} would interpret them in this order:

@cartouche
@example
10 REM JACK AND JILL WENT UP THE HILL
20 REM TO FETCH A PAIL OF WATER.
30 REM JACK FELL DOWN AND BROKE HIS CROWN
40 REM AND JILL CAME TUMBLING AFTER.
@end example
@end cartouche

By convention, when you are writing a program you would normally number
your lines in multiples of ten.  This will allow you or someone else to
insert additional lines into the program at a later time.

Besides ordering, line numbers have one more very important function:
many statements allow @sc{basic} to `jump' from one point in the
program to another, skipping over intervening lines or even going back
to a previous line in the program (@xref{GOTO}.) These statements use
line numbers to tell @sc{basic} which line to execute next.

@node Statement Syntax, A Note On Case, Lines, General Syntax
@section Statements

@stindex @code{LET}
@stindex @code{PRINT}

The simplest lines in @sc{basic} consist of a single statement.  Here
are two lines---one which contains a @code{LET} statement, and the other
contains a @code{PRINT} statement:

@cartouche
@example
10 LET X=1+5/3
20 PRINT X
@end example
@end cartouche

This program will first compute the value of @var{X}, and then print it
(2.66667).  A line can contain more than one statement; multiple
statements are separated by a colon (@samp{:}).  The previous example
could also be written:

@cartouche
@example
10 LET X=1+5/3:PRINT X
@end example
@end cartouche

@cindex interpreted
@cindex @code{READY}

Because @sc{basic} is an interpreted language, you don't have to prefix
a statement with a line number.  Any statement or group of statements
you enter without a preceding line number is executed immediately by
@sc{basic}.

@cartouche
@example
@kbd{LET X=1+5/3:PRINT X}
2.66667

READY
@end example
@end cartouche

The @code{READY} line printed by @sc{basic} indicates that @sc{basic}
has finished executing the instructions you have it and is ready to
accept further instructions.

@node A Note On Case, Running Your Program, Statement Syntax, Statement Syntax
@unnumberedsubsec A Note On Case

As you have seen in the examples so far, @sc{basic} programs are
typically entered in all uppercase.  Historically @sc{basic} has been an
uppercase-only language, because many of the earliest teletype machines
did not have a lowercase character set.

Most of the old microcomputers had both upper- and lowercase characters,
but by default all text was entered in uppercase.  Some versions of
@sc{basic} were case-sensitive, meaning that if you attempted to enter a
statement in lower case, the computer would not be able to understand
you.

@cindex case sensitivity

This implementation of @sc{basic} is case-insensitive.  You can enter
statements in either uppercase or lowercase, or a mixture of both, and
@sc{basic} will be able to recognize them.  When you list your program,
all words that @sc{basic} knows will automatically be converted to
uppercase.  The same applies to variable names (@xref{Variables}),
except that variable names retain the same case the had when you first
used them.

The exception to this is strings (@xref{Data Types}.) @ @sc{Basic}
itself doesn't care what the contents of a string are, but when you
compare two strings, lowercase letters are considered different than
their uppercase counterparts.

To ensure compatibility with other @sc{basic}s, you should enter
everything in upper case only.

@node Running Your Program, Data Types, Statement Syntax, General Syntax
@section Running Your Program
@stindex @code{RUN}

After entering a complete program using line numbers, you tell
@sc{basic} to run the program by entering ``@code{RUN}'' after the
@code{READY} prompt.  @sc{Basic} will start executing statements from
the first line of the program.

Before executing the first statement, this version of @sc{basic}
clears all variables that the program uses as well as removing any
user-defined functions.

@code{RUN} may also be used within a program, which will cause
@sc{basic} to start it over from the beginning.

@node Data Types, Exiting, A Note On Case, General Syntax
@section Data Types

@sc{Basic} has only two data types: numbers and @dfn{strings} (any
arbitrary sequence of numbers, digits, punctuation marks, etc.).

@cindex number
@cindex floating-point
@cindex exponent
@cindex speed of light

A simple number is entered in @sc{basic} just as it would be in any
other (computer or human) language.  Numbers in @sc{basic} can have a
@dfn{floating point}, such as @code{3.14159} (the value of @math{@pi}).
You can also specify an exponential multiplier for exceptionally large
or small numbers.  The syntax for an exponential number is
@var{num}@code{E}[@code{+}@math{|}@w{@code{-}}]@var{exp}, which means
{@catcode`@^=7 @math{num @times 10^{exp}}}.  So, for example, to enter
the speed of light (@math{c}, 300 thousand kilometers per second), you
could type @kbd{3.0E+8}.

Numbers in this implementation of @sc{basic} can have any value up to
{@catcode`@^=7 @math{10^{308}}} in magnitude, and retain up to 15
digits of precision.  (When @sc{basic} prints out numbers, however, it
only displays six significant digits.  In program listings,
floating-point numbers are also reduced to six significant digits, but
integers less than 4 billion will show all digits.)

@cindex string

Strings are entered into programs by enclosing them in double quotation
marks, @samp{"LIKE THIS"}.  A string can contain any regular character
except another double quotation mark or @key{Return}.

@node Exiting, Expressions, Data Types, General Syntax
@section Exiting Out of @sc{Basic}
@cindex exiting @sc{basic}
@cindex quitting @sc{basic}
@stindex @code{BYE}

When you are finishing using the @sc{basic} programming language,
enter ``@code{BYE}'' at the @code{READY} prompt to leave the
interpreter.

@node Expressions, Variables, General Syntax, Top
@chapter Expressions

@node Variables, Arrays, Expressions, Expressions
@section Variables

One of the nice features of programs is that the can repeat the same
sequence of instructions using different starting values, thus
generating different results.  For example, to calculate the distance
between a point at @math{(0,0)} and @math{(3,4)}, you could enter the
statement:

@cartouche
@example
@kbd{PRINT SQR(3*3+4*4)}
5

READY
@end example
@end cartouche

But what if you wanted to repeat the calculation with different end
points, or even different starting points?  To make a more
general-purpose program, you would define a set of @dfn{variables} to
represent the starting and ending points, and perform your computations
on the variables instead of the actual numbers:

@cartouche
@example
10 PRINT SQR((X1-X0)*(X1-X0)+(Y1-Y0)*(Y1-Y0))
@end example
@end cartouche

You can see that this statement is very similar to the equations you
studied in algebra.  Now, when the program is supplied with any
arbitrary starting and ending coordinates, it will show the distance
between those points, and you don't have to change the formula.

@cindex variables

@sc{Basic} has two basic variable types corresponding to its data types:
numeric variables and string variables.  A numeric variable name
consists of a series of letters and numbers, with the rule that the
first character in the name must be a letter.  So, for example, a
variable name can be as short as @var{X}, or as long as
@var{A1ANDA2ANDA3ANDA4} or more!  (However, we recommend keeping your
variable names short.)

A string variable is named just like a numeric variable, but with a
dollar sign (@samp{$}) tagged at the end, as in @var{A$} or
@var{PLAYER2NAME$}.  String variables are distinct from numeric
variables, so, for example, you can use both @var{N} and @var{N$} in
your program.

Whenever you start a program with the @code{RUN} command, @sc{basic}
will clear all variables---numeric variables are set to 0 and string
variables are emptied.  However, not all versions of @sc{basic} behave
this way; programs should always initialize the variables they use at
the beginning and not rely on them having any particular value.

@node Arrays, Assignment, Variables, Expressions
@section Arrays

@cindex arrays
@cindex variable arrays

At times you may wish to have a large set of related variables, for
example elements in a vector.  For this purpose, you can define a
@dfn{variable array}, which is like a list of values.  Unlike simple
variables, which you can make up and use as you need them, an array
should be defined ahead of time so that @sc{basic} knows how big it
is.  This is done with the @code{DIM} (@sc{dim}ension) statement:

@cartouche
@example
10 DIM X(20),Y(20)
@end example
@end cartouche

This example defines two arrays, @var{X} and @var{Y}, having twenty
elements each.  To use a particular element of an array, just give the
array `subscript' in parentheses, as in @samp{X(1)} or @samp{Y(4)}.  The
subscript can even be another variable or an arithmetic expression, as
in @samp{X(2*N-1)}.

If you use an array variable without first giving its
@code{DIM}ension, @sc{basic} will create it with a default dimension
of 10 elements.

Variable arrays are distinct from simple variables, so you could, if you
wanted to, use both @var{X} and @var{X(N)} in your program; the value of
@var{X} is distinct from any of the elements of @var{X(N)}.  For
clarity, however, we do not recommend this.

An array can have more than one @dfn{dimension}.  To define a
multi-dimensional array, use the @code{DIM} statement just as with a
one-dimensional array, and specify the size of each dimension separated
by commas within the variable's parentheses.  For example:

@cartouche
@example
10 DIM M(7,9),N(5,5,5,5,5)
@end example
@end cartouche

@noindent
defines a two-dimensional matrix @var{M} with 7 rows and 9 columns, and
a 5-dimensional array @var{N} where the size of each dimension is five
(for a total of {@catcode`@^=7 @math{5^5}}, or 3125 elements!).
Remember that when you access an element of an array, you must provide
the same number of subscripts as the number of dimensions in the array.
If you give too few or too many subscripts, you will get an error.

You can re-dimension an array at any time, to give it a different size
or even a different number of dimensions.  Be warned, however, that when
you do, all of the previous values contained in the array will be lost.
A newly dimensioned numeric array will have all of its elements set to
zero; a string array will start out with all of its strings empty.

@subsection Caveat - Subscript Starting Point

@cindex array subscript base

Older @sc{basic}s did not agree on how array elements should be
numbered; some versions numbered the array subscripts from 1 to @var{n}
(where @var{n} is the size of the array), while others numbered the
subscript from 0 to @math{n-1}.  This implementation allows either
origin; your arrays actually have elements numbered from 0 through
@var{n} for a total of @math{n+1} elements.  But you should restrict
your indexing to either a 1-base or 0-base.

@node Assignment, Operators, Arrays, Expressions
@section Assignment

@stindex @code{LET}

The basic method of assigning a value to your variable is with the
@code{LET} statement, as in the following example:

@cartouche
@example
10 LET M(X(I),Y(I))=I
@end example
@end cartouche

In this version of @sc{basic}, like most microcomputer versions, the
keyword @code{LET} is optional; so you can get the same result just by
typing:

@cartouche
@example
10 M(X(I),Y(I))=I
@end example
@end cartouche

@node Operators, Mathematical Operators, Assignment, Expressions
@section Operators

@node Mathematical Operators, Logical Operators, Operators, Operators
@subsection Mathematical Operators

@findex + @r{(for addition)}
@findex - @r{(for subtraction)}
@findex *
@findex /
@cindex arithmetic operators
@findex ^
@cindex exponentiation

@sc{Basic} understands the basic arithmetic operators @samp{+} and
@samp{-} for addition and subtraction, and the characters @samp{*} and
@samp{/} for multiplication and division.  You can also use the @samp{^}
character for exponentiation; entering @kbd{@var{X}^@var{Y}} will yield
the result of {@catcode`@^=7 @math{x^y}}.

Complex expressions are evaluated in standard algebraic form---operators
of higher precedence (@samp{^}) are evaluated before operators of lower
precedence (@samp{+}, @samp{-}), and operators of equal precedence are
evaluated from left to right.

@findex - @r{(for negation)}
@cindex negation

The @samp{-} operator serves a dual purpose.  In addition to
subtraction (no pun intended), it is also used to negate a number---to
change a number from positive to negative or vice-versa.  Negation,
unlike all of the other operators, has a right-to-left association@dots@
but you wouldn't use multiple negative signs in a row now, would you?

You may use parentheses to change the order of evaluation.  For example,
the expression @kbd{5+4/3*2} is evaluated as @math{5+((4@div3)@times2)},
resulting in 7.66667.  To evaluate the formula @math{5+4@over3@times2}
you would type in @kbd{(5+4)/(3*2)}, which will give you 1.5.

@node Logical Operators, String Operators, Mathematical Operators, Operators
@subsection Logical Operators

@cindex relational operators

There are relational operators you can use to compare two numbers or
expressions.  These operators are normally used in the @code{IF..THEN}
statement (@xref{IF}).  Each of these operators results in a `true' or
`false' answer, depending on whether the condition is true for the
values on either side of the operator.

@findex =
@findex <>
@findex <
@findex >
@findex <=
@findex >=

The relational operators are @samp{=} (for equality), @samp{<>}
(@math{@neq}, for inequality), @samp{<} (left value less than the right
value), @samp{>} (left value greater than the right value), @samp{<=}
(@math{@le}, less than or equal), and @samp{>=} (@math{@ge}, greater
than or equal).

Note that in this implementation, in order to reduce errors due to
rounding, comparisons are only done with six digits of precision unless
the magnitude of the number is greater than {@catcode`@^=7
@math{10^{38}}} or smaller than {@catcode`@^=7 @math{10^{-38}}}.

Relational operators also work with strings and string variables.  In
such comparisons, one string is considered `less' than another if the
first character which differs in the left string precedes the
corresponding character of the right string according to their
@sc{ascii} character codes.  Since string comparisons are
case-sensitive, all uppercase letters precede all lowercase letters;
thus the expression @samp{@w{"USA" < "United States"}} evaluates as
true.

@findex AND
@findex OR
@cindex boolean operators

In addition to the relational operators, there are two boolean
operators: @code{AND} and @code{OR}.  These can be used with relational
comparisons to test two conditions and evaluates to true if both or
either condition is true.

The `truth' result of a logical operation is actually a value of either
zero or one.  This is important when reading some existing @sc{basic}
programs; some variations of @sc{basic} define `true' to be @math{-1},
and some @sc{basic} programs use this value directly in arithmetic
expressions assuming one sign or the other.  When you write a program,
you should not assume that `true' is negative or positive, or even 1 for
that matter.  The proper way to use a truth result in an expression is
to first set the sign and magnitude with something like
@samp{ABS(SGN(@var{condition}))} (@xref{ABS} and @ref{SGN}).

@node String Operators, Precedence, Logical Operators, Operators
@subsection String Operators

@findex + @r{(for string concatenation)}
@cindex string concatenation

There is only one string operator defined in this version of
@sc{basic}, and it is present because some popular @sc{basic} programs
use it.  The @samp{+} operator will @dfn{concatenate} two strings ---
it creates a new string consisting of the first and second strings run
together.  For example, if the contents of the variable @var{NAME$} is
@samp{"JOHN"}, then the result of @samp{@w{"HELLO "+NAME$}} is
@samp{@w{"HELLO JOHN"}}.

@node Precedence, Functions, String Operators, Expressions
@section Precedence

@cindex precedence, operator
@cindex operator precedence

For the record, here is the order of precedence of all the operators
@sc{basic} knows.  Operators higher up in the list will be evaluated
before those below them.

@enumerate
@item @samp{-} (negation)
@item @samp{^} (exponentiation)
@item @samp{*}, @samp{/} (multiplication and division)
@item @samp{+}, @samp{-} (addition and subtraction)
@item Relational operators*
@item @samp{AND}
@item @samp{OR}
@end enumerate

*The relational operators have no associativity.  Unlike the arithmetic
and boolean logic operators, you cannot place two relational operators
in the same subexpression.  For example, the expression @samp{4<5=1<9}
simply makes no sense.  Instead, you must explicitly parenthesize the
subordinate relations, as in @samp{(4<5)=(1<9)} (which is true).  You do
not need parentheses for comparisons separated by @samp{AND} and
@samp{OR}; it is okay to say @samp{4<5 AND 1<9} (true).

@node Functions, Simple Numeric Functions, Precedence, Expressions
@section Functions

Arithmetic will only get you so far.  @sc{Basic} provides a set of
@dfn{functions} which perform more complex calculations (such as
trigonometry) and manipulation of strings.

@node Simple Numeric Functions, ABS, Functions, Functions
@subsection Simple Numeric Functions
@cindex functions, numeric

@node ABS, INT, Simple Numeric Functions, Simple Numeric Functions
@subsubsection @code{ABS}
@findex ABS

@code{ABS(@var{X})} will compute the absolute value of @var{X}; if
@var{X} is negative, the answer will be positive.

@node INT, RND, ABS, Simple Numeric Functions
@subsubsection @code{INT}
@findex INT

@code{INT(@var{X})} returns the integer part of @var{X} by truncating
any digits past the decimal point (rounding towards zero).

@node RND, SGN, INT, Simple Numeric Functions
@subsubsection @code{RND}, @code{SEED}
@findex RND

@samp{RND(1)} generates a random number in the range @math{[0,1)}.  This
corresponds with the implementation of most other @sc{basic}s.  This
version of @code{RND} has two additional variations: If you use
@samp{RND(0)}, @sc{basic} will first @dfn{randomize} the random number
generator (otherwise, the sequence of random numbers would come up the
same the next time you started @sc{basic}).

Secondly, you can use @samp{RND(@var{N})} to generate a random number in
the range @math{[0,N)}.  This makes it a little easier to generate
random numbers in an arbitrary range, rather than computing
@samp{@var{N}*RND(1)}.

@findex SEED

If for some reason you need to repeat a sequence of random numbers (for
example, to repeat a statistical analysis or to debug your program), you
can use @samp{SEED(@var{X})} to @dfn{seed} the random number generator
at a given starting point @var{X}.

@node SGN, Trigonometric and Transcendental Functions, RND, Simple Numeric Functions
@subsubsection @code{SGN}
@findex SGN

@code{SGN(@var{X})} will return one of three possible values: 1 if
@var{X} is positive, @math{-1} if @var{X} is negative, or 0 of @var{X}
is zero.

@node Trigonometric and Transcendental Functions, ATN, SGN, Functions
@subsection Trigonometric and Transcendental Functions
@cindex functions, trigonometric

In @sc{basic}, all trigonometric functions measure angles in degrees
(0--360).

@node ATN, COS, Trigonometric and Transcendental Functions, Trigonometric and Transcendental Functions
@subsubsection @code{ATN}
@findex ATN

@code{ATN(@var{X})} computes the arctangent of @var{X}.

@node COS, EXP, ATN, Trigonometric and Transcendental Functions
@subsubsection @code{COS}
@findex COS

@code{COS(@math{@mit@Theta})} computes the cosine of @math{@mit@Theta}.

@node EXP, LOG, COS, Trigonometric and Transcendental Functions
@subsubsection @code{EXP}
@cindex functions, transcendental
@findex EXP

@code{EXP(@var{X})} computes the natural exponential of @var{X}, or
{@catcode`@^=7 @math{e^X}}.

@node LOG, SIN, EXP, Trigonometric and Transcendental Functions
@subsubsection @code{LOG}
@findex LOG

@code{LOG(@var{X})} computes the natural logarithm of @var{X}.

@node SIN, SQR, LOG, Trigonometric and Transcendental Functions
@subsubsection @code{SIN}
@findex SIN

@code{SIN(@math{@mit@Theta})} computes the sine of @math{@mit@Theta}.
@findex SQR

@node SQR, TAN, SIN, Trigonometric and Transcendental Functions
@subsubsection @code{SQR}
@findex SQR

@code{SQR(@var{X})} computes the square root of @var{X}, or @math{\sqrt{X}}.

@node TAN, String Functions, SQR, Trigonometric and Transcendental Functions
@subsubsection @code{TAN}
@findex TAN

@code{TAN(@math{@mit@Theta})} computes the tangent of @math{@mit@Theta}.

@node String Functions, LEN, TAN, Functions
@subsection String Functions
@cindex functions, string

@node LEN, LEFT$, String Functions, String Functions
@subsubsection @code{LEN}
@findex LEN

@code{LEN(@var{A$})} returns the length of the string @var{A$}.

@node LEFT$, LOWER$, LEN, String Functions
@subsubsection @code{LEFT$}
@findex LEFT$

@code{LEFT$(@var{A$},@var{N})} makes a new string consisting of the
first @var{N} characters of @var{A$}.  If @var{N} is greater than the
length of @var{A$}, you will get a copy of the entire string.

@node LOWER$, RIGHT$, LEFT$, String Functions
@subsubsection @code{LOWER$}
@findex LOWER$

@code{LOWER$(@var{A$})} makes a new string that is a copy of @var{A$}
with all upper case characters converted to lower case.  This function
is not a part of the original @sc{basic}s, but was added because
typing in lower case is much more common on modern computers.

@node RIGHT$, MID$, LEFT$, String Functions
@subsubsection @code{RIGHT$}
@findex RIGHT$

@code{RIGHT$(@var{A$},@var{N})} makes a new string consisting of the
@emph{last} @var{N} characters of @var{A$}.  If @var{N} is greater than
the length of @var{A$}, you will get a copy of the entire string.

@node MID$, TAB, RIGHT$, String Functions
@subsubsection @code{MID$}
@findex MID$

@code{MID$(@var{A$},@var{B},@var{N})} makes a new string consisting of
@var{N} characters from @var{A$}, starting with the
@var{B}{@catcode`@^=7 @math{{}^{th}}} character.  The first character in
a string is numbered 1.  If @var{B} is greater than the length of
@var{A$}, you will get an empty string.  If @math{B+N} is greater than
the length of @var{A$}, you will get the right part of @var{A$} starting
at the @var{B}{@catcode`@^=7 @math{{}^{th}}} character.

@node TAB, UPPER$, MID$, String Functions
@subsubsection @code{TAB}
@findex TAB

@code{TAB} is a special function that is only available in
@code{PRINT} statements (@ref{PRINT}).  It advances the cursor to the
given column on the screen; for example @code{PRINT
TAB(36);"CENTERED"} will print 36 spaces (assuming it starts from the
left side of the screen) before the word ``CENTERED''.

If you end a @code{PRINT} command with @code{TAB}, it will remain at
the given column rather than advance to the next line the same as if
you had ended it with a semicolon (@code{;}).

@node UPPER$, Numeric and String Conversion Functions, TAB, String Functions
@subsubsection @code{UPPER$}
@findex UPPER$

@code{UPPER$(@var{A$})} makes a new string that is a copy of @var{A$}
with all lower case characters converted to upper case.  This function
is not a part of the original @sc{basic}s, but was added because
typing in lower case is much more common on modern computers, but
older @sc{basic} programs typically expect input to be in upper case
and string comparisons are case-sensitive.

@node Numeric and String Conversion Functions, ASC, String Functions, Functions
@subsection Numeric and String Conversion Functions
@cindex functions, conversion

@node ASC, CHR$, Numeric and String Conversion Functions, Numeric and String Conversion Functions
@subsubsection @code{ASC}
@findex ASC

@code{ASC(@var{A$})} gives you the @sc{ascii} code of the first
character in @var{A$}.

@node CHR$, STR$, ASC, Numeric and String Conversion Functions
@subsubsection @code{CHR$}
@findex CHR$

@code{CHR$(@var{X})} generates a 1-character string whose character's
@sc{ascii} code is @var{X}.  This is especially useful for printing a
quotation mark (@samp{CHR$(34)}) or certain control characters (i.e.,
@samp{CHR$(7)} for an @sc{ascii} bell).

@node STR$, VAL, CHR$, Numeric and String Conversion Functions
@subsubsection @code{STR$}
@findex STR$

@code{STR$(@var{X})} makes the number @var{X} into a printable string.

@node VAL, User-Defined Functions, STR$, Numeric and String Conversion Functions
@subsubsection @code{VAL}
@findex VAL

@code{VAL(@var{A$})} converts an @sc{ascii} representation of a number
into a numerical value.  Note that if @var{A$} does not consist of (or
at least start with) a number, the resulting value will be zero.

@node User-Defined Functions, Statements, Numeric and String Conversion Functions, Functions
@subsection User-Defined Functions
@stindex @code{DEF}
@cindex functions, user-defined

A program can define its own functions by using the @code{DEF}
statement.  This looks similar to an assignment with an array
variable, except the arguments are function parameters rather than an
array index.

For example, the following program defines functions that select the
minimum and maximum between two numbers:

@cartouche
@example
10 DEF MIN(A,B)=(A+B-ABS(A-B))/2
20 DEF MAX(A,B)=(A+B+ABS(A-B))/2
@end example
@end cartouche

The variables used for the function parameters are not important
outside of the definition; for example if the variables @code{A} and
@code{B} are used elsewhere with the above program their values will
not be changed by calls to @code{MIN(X,Y)} or @code{MAX(I,J)}.  The
function definitions @emph{may} use other variables besides the
function parameters, in which case it will use the value that those
variables hold at the time the function is called.

You can also define string functions this way.  For example, the
following program defines a function that generates a random letter
from ``A'' to ``Z'':

@cartouche
@example
30 DEF RNDALPHA$(X)=CHR$(INT(RND(26))+65)
@end example
@end cartouche

As shown in this example the function parameter doesn't need to
actually be used in the function, but the function definition must
have at least one parameter.

@node Statements, Remarks, Expressions, Top
@chapter Statements

@node Remarks, Working With Data, Statements, Statements
@section Remarks (@code{REM})
@cindex comments in the program
@cindex remarks
@stindex @code{REM}

@code{REM} adds a @sc{rem}ark to the program.  @sc{Basic} ignores
remarks when executing a program, but all text following the @code{REM}
statement is preserved.

@cartouche
@example
10 REM A GAME OF TIC-TAC-TOE BY JOHN DOE
@end example
@end cartouche

Note that everything else up until the end of the line is considered
part of the remark, so no other statement can follow @code{REM}.  (You
can use this to your advantage sometimes if you want to temporarily
remove a line of statements from the program.)

Remarks help document what the program is doing.  You should sprinkle
these statements liberally throughout your program so that another
person reading the code later on can understand it more easily.

Some early versions of @sc{basic} supported the longer keyword
``@code{REMARK}'' as well as its 3-letter abbreviation, so this
version of @sc{basic} supports this as well as ``@code{REM.}'' for
entering but will shorten it to the standard @code{REM} keyword in the
program listing.

@node Working With Data, Input and Output, Remarks, Statements
@section Working With Data

@node LET, DEF, Working With Data, Working With Data
@subsection @code{LET}
@cindex assignment of values to variables
@cindex variables, assigning values to
@stindex @code{LET}

To assign a value to a variable (@xref{Variables}), use the @code{LET}
statement.  The syntax is @samp{LET @var{variable}=@var{expression}}.

@cartouche
@example
50 LET Y=5/9*(X-32)
@end example
@end cartouche

@cindex implied @code{LET}

In most versions of @sc{basic} (including this one), the @code{LET}
keyword is optional.  If you omit it, @sc{basic} will assume an
@dfn{implied @code{LET}}.  This can make your code simpler and in some
cases easier to understand.

@cartouche
@example
20 PI=3.14159265
60 F=C*9/5+32
@end example
@end cartouche

@node DEF, DIM, LET, Working With Data
@subsection @code{DEF}
@stindex @code{DEF}

Use @code{DEF} to declare a user-defined function; @pxref{User-Defined
Functions} for more details.

@node DIM, DATA, DEF, Working With Data
@subsection @code{DIM}
@cindex arrays
@stindex @code{DIM}

Use @code{DIM} to create one or more arrays.  The general syntax is
@samp{DIM
@var{variable}(@var{size}@r{[},@var{size}@dots@r{]})@r{[},@dots@r{]}}.
You may create any number of arrays on one line (at least as many as
will fit).  Arrays may be numeric or string.  Each array must have at
least one dimension; the maximum number of dimensions is limited by the
amount of available memory.  Each dimension can have a size as small as
zero (not very useful) up to a maximum of 65535.

@cartouche
@example
30 DIM X(10),R(2,3,5,7),A$(4,4)
@end example
@end cartouche

@node DATA, READ, DIM, Working With Data
@subsection @code{DATA}
@cindex predefined data lists
@stindex @code{DATA}

The @code{DATA} statement defines a sequence of constant values that
can be read sequentially by @code{READ} statements (described below).
Each constant can be either numeric or string.  Multiple constants can
be listed on a single @code{DATA} line separated by commas.

@code{DATA} statements are ignored during program execution so they
may be placed anywhere which is convenient or fits neatly with the
code that uses it.

@cartouche
@example
1000 DATA 42, 3.14159, "Hello"
@end example
@end cartouche

@node READ, RESTORE, DATA, Working With Data
@subsection @code{READ}
@stindex @code{READ}

The @code{READ} statement assigns the next constant from a @code{DATA}
statement to a variable.  @sc{Basic} maintains an internal pointer to
the datawhich starts at the first @code{DATA} statement and advances
it to the next constant in the statement or the next line of
@code{DATA} each time @code{READ} is used.

Multiple data values can be read at once by supplying several values
to the @code{READ} statement separated by commas.

@cartouche
@example
50 READ A, PI, GREETING$
@end example
@end cartouche

If a @code{READ} statement attemps to read more data than is
available, an error will occur.  Likewise if the program tries to read
a number into a string variable or a string into a numeric variable,
an error will occur.

@node RESTORE, Input and Output, READ, Working With Data
@subsection @code{RESTORE}
@stindex @code{RESTORE}

The @code{RESTORE} statement may be used to reset @sc{basic}'s
internal data pointer back to the first @code{DATA} statement in a
program.  You can also provide a line number to this statement which
will set the data pointer to the next @code{DATA} statement on or
after the given line.

@cartouche
@example
60 RESTORE
70 IF A < 42 THEN RESTORE 1000
@end example
@end cartouche

@node Input and Output, Flow Control, Working with Data, Statements
@section Input and Output

@node PRINT, INPUT, Input and Output, Input and Output
@subsection @code{PRINT}
@cindex output
@cindex printing messages
@stindex @code{PRINT}

The @code{PRINT} statement is how a @sc{basic} program informs a user
about what it's doing or the results of the program.  In its simplest
form, @code{PRINT} with no data just outputs a blank line.  To print a
literal line of text, follow @code{PRINT} with a quoted string
containing the text you want the program to print.  This is the most
common beginner program:

@cartouche
@example
10 PRINT "Hello, world!"
@end example
@end cartouche

A more useful case is to have the program print the value of a
variable that has been calculated.  Just follow @code{PRINT} with the
name of the variable to display.

@cartouche
@example
20 LET ROOT2=SQR(2)
30 PRINT ROOT2
@end example
@end cartouche

To make it clearer what data is being shown, you can combine literal
strings with variables.  Separate the strings and variables with a
semicolon to have them printed adjacent to each other.

@cartouche
@example
30 PRINT "The square root of 2 is "; ROOT2
@end example
@end cartouche

@emph{In some early versions of @sc{basic}, using the semicolon to
separate strings and variables in @code{PRINT} was optional.  This
@sc{basic} supports that syntax, but we encourage using the semicolon
for readability.}

If you end the @code{PRINT} statement with a semicolon, @sc{basic}
will not start a new line at the end; another @code{PRINT} statement
later in the program will continue printing on that same line.
Remember to add a space at the end of a string if it will be followed
by a variable value, otherwise they will be mashed together like
``@dots is1.41421'' instead of ``@dots is 1.41421''.

Likewise if you end @code{PRINT} with a @code{TAB} (@pxref{TAB}),
@sc{basic} will leave the cursor at the given column instead of going
to the next line so the next @code{PRINT} will start from that
position.

You can space items out in the output at tab stops by separating them
with a comma instead of a semicolon.  The comma causes the output to
advance to the next tab stop, which by convention is at the next
multiple of 8 spaces from the start of a line.

@cartouche
@example
PRINT "The first prime numbers are", 2, 3, 5, 7
@end example
@end cartouche

The output from the above statement will look like:

@cartouche
@example
The first prime numbers are     2       3       5       7
@end example
@end cartouche

You may also begin the @code{PRINT} statement with a comma to advance
to the next tab stop before printing the next item, or use several
commas in a row to advance multiple tab stops.

@cartouche
@example
10 PRINT "Flush left"
12 PRINT ,"Tab"
14 PRINT ,,"Tab"
16 PRINT ,,,"Tab"
18 PRINT ,,,,"Tab"
@end example
@end cartouche

The output from running the above program will be:

@cartouche
@example
Flush left
        Tab
                Tab
                        Tab
                                Tab
@end example
@end cartouche

Ending a @code{PRINT} statement with a comma will advance to the next
tab stop and, like the semicolon, leave the cursor there for the next
@code{PRINT} instead of advancing to the next line.

@node INPUT, Flow Control, PRINT, Input and Output
@subsection @code{INPUT}
@cindex input
@cindex reading user data
@stindex @code{INPUT}

The @code{INPUT} statement lets the program get data or text from the
user.  This statement must be followed by the name of a variable in
which to store the user's data.  It can either get numeric or string
data.

@cartouche
@example
40 INPUT X
@end example
@end cartouche

@sc{Basic} will display a ``? '' prompt to let the user know it's
waiting for input.  To make it clear to the user what the program is
asking for, you can either precede the @code{INPUT} statement with a
@code{PRINT} statement (ending the @code{PRINT} with a semicolon if
you want the ``? '' and user input to appear on the same line) or for
convenience you can lead the @code{INPUT} statement itself with a
literal string and a semicolon before the variable to use.

@cartouche
@example
40 INPUT "How many apples do you have"; X
@end example
@end cartouche

@code{INPUT} can read multiple variables in the same statement.
Separate the variables with a comma.  For each variable, @sc{basic}
will prompt the user with a ``? '' and read the next line of input.

@cartouche
@example
50 PRINT "Please enter your first, middle, and last name"
60 INPUT FIRST$, MIDDLE$, LAST$
70 REM Build the message incrementally
80 LET MESSAGE$="Hello " + FIRST$
90 MESSAGE$=MESSAGE$ + ", also called " + MIDDLE$
100 MESSAGE$=MESSAGE$ + ", of the " + LAST$ + " family!"
110 PRINT MESSAGE$
@end example
@end cartouche

@node Flow Control, Program Management, Input and Output, Statements
@section Flow Control
@cindex flow control

@node GOTO, END, Flow Control, Flow Control
@subsection @code{GOTO}
@cindex jump to another line
@cindex unconditional branch
@stindex @code{GOTO}

Normally @sc{basic} executes each line of a program in sequential
order, and after running the last line of the program, it stops.  This
order can be changed by using the @code{GOTO} statement to tell
@sc{basic} which line of the program to execute next.  A typical case
is to have the program repeat the same code continually.

@cartouche
@example
10 LET COUNT=1
20 PRINT COUNT,"Hello, world!"
30 COUNT=COUNT+1
40 GOTO 20
@end example
@end cartouche

A program like the above will run forever unless the user interrupts
it by typing Ctrl-@kbd{C}.  Another use for @code{GOTO} is to skip
over a section of code.

@cartouche
@example
10 PRINT "One upon a time,"
15 GOTO 990
20 PRINT "there was a beautiful princess."
30 INPUT "What is your name"; NAME$
40 PRINT "Amazingly, the princess was also named "; NAME$
50 PRINT "In the kingdom of ..."
REM more story lines here
990 PRINT "And they lived happily ever after."
@end example
@end cartouche

The program above will skip from the opening phrase right to the end
without doing anything in the middle.

@code{GOTO} statements should only be used sparingly, since if a
program is large and the flow is complex they can create what is known
as ``spaghetti code'' where a developer can't follow what the program
is supposed to be doing, and in many cases in can break the flow of
other control statements.

@node END, GOSUB and RETURN, GOTO, Flow Control
@subsection @code{END}
@cindex stopping
@stindex @code{END}

The @code{END} statement simply tells @sc{basic} to stop running the
program.

@cartouche
@example
10 INPUT "What is your name"; NAME$
17 END
20 PRINT "Hello, "; NAME$
@end example
@end cartouche

The above example will take the user's input but never says ``Hello''.

@node GOSUB and RETURN, STOP and CONTINUE, GOTO and END, Flow Control
@subsection Subroutines: @code{GOSUB} and @code{RETURN}
@cindex jump with return
@cindex subroutines
@stindex @code{GOSUB}
@stindex @code{RETURN}

@sc{Basic} can switch to another section of a program on a temporary
basis and remember where it left so that it can come back and continue
from there.  The @code{GOSUB} statement works similarly to the
@code{GOTO} statement, except it leaves a bookmark of where it left so
that it can @code{RETURN} there later.  This is very useful when you
have a section of code that can be re-used in several places within
your program.

The subroutine should end with a @code{RETURN} statement, which tells
@sc{basic} to go back to the next statement after the @code{GOTO}
which sent it there.

@cartouche
@example
10 INPUT "Enter the first value"; A
20 GOSUB 100
30 INPUT "Enter the second value"; A
40 GOSUB 100
50 INPUT "Enter the third value"; A
60 GOSUB 100
90 END
100 REM This subroutine computes functions of A
110 B=A*A
120 C=A*B
130 D=B*C
140 PRINT A; " squared is "; B
150 PRINT A; " cubed is "; C
160 PRINT "The fifth power of "; A; " is "; D
170 RETURN
@end example
@end cartouche

@node STOP and CONTINUE, IF, GOSUB and RETURN, Flow Control
@subsection Temporary Pause: @code{STOP} and @code{CONTINUE}
@cindex stopping
@stindex @code{CONTINUE}
@stindex @code{STOP}

The @code{STOP} statement @emph{temporarily} stops running a program,
returning to the ``READY'' prompt.  @sc{Basic} remembers where it left
off.

After a program has stopped in this way, the @code{CONTINUE} statement
resumes running the program from the next statement.  If the program
was finished (either by reaching the end of the program or using the
@code{END} statement), @code{CONTINUE} does nothing.

For convenience, the @code{CONTINUE} command may be abbreviated as
``@code{CONT.}''.

@node IF, ELSE, STOP and CONTINUE, Flow Control
@subsection Conditional Code: @code{IF}
@cindex conditional execution
@stindex @code{IF}

Frequently a program will need to choose to do different things
depending on the values of its variables.  The @code{IF} statement
evaluates an expression --- typically a comparison --- and either
executes the statement following @code{THEN} if the result is true
(i.e. has a non-zero value) or skips that statement if the result is
false (i.e. zero).  There are two forms of this statement.

@cartouche
@example
120 IF X > 10 THEN 150
130 PRINT X;" is less than 10"
140 GOTO 160
150 PRINT X;" is greater than or equal to 10"
160 REM Both branches join here
@end example
@end cartouche

@cindex implied @code{GOTO}

When @code{THEN} is followed by a line number, the program goes to
that line if the expression is true; otherwise it continues to the
next line.  This is an implied @code{GOTO}.

@cartouche
@example
200 IF Y < 10 THEN PRINT Y;" is less than 10"
210 IF Y > 10 THEN PRINT Y;" is greater than 10"
@end example
@end cartouche

When @code{THEN} is followed by another statement, the program
executes the rest of the line if the expression is true; otherwise it
skips that line and continues to the next line.  You may have multiple
statements after @code{THEN}; @sc{basic} will skip all of them if the
expression is false, with the exception of an @code{ELSE} clause.

The statement following @code{THEN} may be another @code{IF}
statement, allowing you to chain multiple conditions together.  This
is for compatibility with some older Dartmouth @sc{basic} programs;
for clarity in new programs, consider using the @code{AND} operator
instead.

For compatibility with some versions of @sc{basic}, then @code{THEN}
keyword may be omitted; for example:

@cartouche
@example
250 IF A<1 GOTO 520
@end example
@end cartouche

However in most cases leaving out ``@code{THEN}'' can render the code
less readable, so it is recommended that you always use it.

@node ELSE, FOR and NEXT, IF, Flow Control
@subsection @code{ELSE}
@stindex @code{ELSE}

@code{ELSE} is used following an @code{IF} / @code{THEN} statement to
have @sc{basic} run an alternative statement if the expression is
false (zero).  As with @code{THEN}, there are two forms of this clause
available.

@cartouche
@example
300 IF B < C THEN 320 ELSE 350
@end example
@end cartouche

@cindex implied @code{GOTO}

When @code{ELSE} is followed by a line number, the program goes to
that line if the @code{IF} expression is false.  This is an implied
@code{GOTO}.

@cartouche
@example
10 IF A < 0 THEN END ELSE PRINT "Still going..."
@end example
@end cartouche

When @code{ELSE} is followed by another statement, the program
executes the rest of the line if the @code{IF} expression is false.

The statement following @code{ELSE} may be another @code{IF}
statement, allowing you to chain multiple conditions together.
However, nesting @code{IF} statements this way can make your program
confusing to read since it may not be clear which condition a
secondary or later @code{ELSE} clause applies to.  Consider using a
single conditional expression with @code{AND} and @code{OR} operators
instead, or using implied @code{GOTO}s and separating the true and
false statement blocks over different lines.

@node FOR and NEXT, ON GO, ELSE, Flow Control
@subsection Looping with @code{FOR} and @code{NEXT}
@cindex loops
@stindex @code{FOR}
@stindex @code{NEXT}
@stindex @code{STEP}

A section of code can be repeated a specified number of times by
enclosing it in a @code{FOR}@dots @code{NEXT} loop.  The @code{FOR}
statement tells @sc{basic} what variable to use for counting the
number of times the loop runs; it sets the given variable to the
initial value and then continues with the following statements until
reaching the @code{NEXT} statement for the same variable.  Then it
adds 1 to the variable's value and checks whether it has passed the
@code{TO} value; if not, @sc{basic} goes back to the statement
following @code{FOR}.

@cartouche
@example
10 FOR A=1 TO 5
20 READ STR$
30 PRINT A;". ";STR$
40 NEXT A
50 DATA "Pink hearts","Yellow moons"
51 DATA "Orange stars","Green clovers"
52 DATA "Blue diamonds"
@end example
@end cartouche

The above example will print 5 numbered lines, each showing the next
string from the data.

You can change the amount and/or direction by which the variable
increments each time through the loop by adding a @code{STEP} to the
@code{FOR} statement.  Then @sc{basic} will add the @code{STEP} amount
to the variable each time it reaches @code{NEXT}.  For example, the
following code will count backwards:

@cartouche
@example
10 FOR N=100 TO 1 STEP -1
20 PRINT N;
30 IF N>1 THEN PRINT ", ";
40 T=N/10:T=T-INT(T)
50 IF T=0.1 THEN PRINT
60 NEXT N
@end example
@end cartouche

And the next example will show multiples of @math{\pi}:

@cartouche
@example
10 FOR P=0 TO 32 STEP 3.14159
20 PRINT P
30 NEXT P
@end example
@end cartouche

@code{FOR} loops can be nested if you use different variables.

@cartouche
@example
10 DIM M(10,10)
20 FOR I=1 TO 10
30 FOR J=1 TO 10
40 IF I=J THEN M(I,J)=1:ELSE M(I,J)=0
50 NEXT J
60 NEXT I
@end example
@end cartouche

In the event that the initial value of a FOR loop exceeds the TO value
(with a positive STEP, or if it is less than the TO value with a
negative STEP) @sc{basic} will skip over the following statements
until it finds the matching @code{NEXT} statement for the same
variable, then continue the program after that point.

@cartouche
@example
10 LET S=-1
20 FOR X=0 TO S
30 PRINT "This line should not be shown"
40 NEXT X
50 PRINT "This should be the first line shown"
@end example
@end cartouche

@node ON GO, Program Management, FOR and NEXT, Flow Control
@subsection Case Switching with @code{ON} / @code{GO}...
@cindex selective jump
@cindex switching
@stindex @code{ON}@dots@code{GOSUB}
@stindex @code{ON}@dots@code{GOTO}

The @code{ON} statement lets a program choose one of many possible
paths to take next depending on a numeric expression.  @code{ON} is
followed by a variable or expression that evaluates to an ordinal
number that tells @sc{basic} which entry in a list of line numbers to
use, then either @code{GOTO} (@pxref {@code{GOTO}}) or @code{GOSUB}
(@pxref{GOSUB and RETURN}) followed by the list of line numbers.

@cartouche
@example
10 FOR X=1 TO 5
20 ON X GOSUB 1100,1200,1300,1400,1500
30 NEXT X
40 END
@end example
@end cartouche

In the above example, the program will go to each of the subroutines
in the list as X runs through the sequence of numbers 1 through 5.

Any fractional value for the expression is truncated to an integer.
If the expression evaluates to a non-positive number, @sc{basic} will
go to the first line number in the list.  If the expression is greater
than the number of line numbers in the list, @sc{basic} will skip over
the @code{GOTO} / @code{GOSUB} part of the @code{ON} statement and
continue to the next statement.

@node Program Management, Index, Flow Control, Statements
@section Program Management

@node LIST, SAVE, Program Management, Program Management
@subsection Listing Your Program
@stindex @code{LIST}

The @code{LIST} statement displays the contents of your @sc{basic}
program.  Without any parameters, @code{LIST} will show the entire
program.

If your program is large, you may want to show just part of the
program at a time.  With a single numeric argument, @code{LIST} shows
the specified line.  With two numbers, e.g. @code{LIST 100,199}, it
shows all lines in that range.

@node SAVE, NEW, LIST, Program Management
@subsection Saving Your Program
@cindex storing programs
@stindex @code{SAVE}

To save your program for later use, use the @code{SAVE} command with a
string giving the name of a file in which to store the program.
@sc{Basic} will produce a listing of the program like the @code{LIST}
command, but write it to the named file instead of the screen.

@cartouche
@example
SAVE "MyPrograms/example.basic"
@end example
@end cartouche

How you name your program files is entirely up to you, but using an
extension of @file{.basic} or @file{.BASIC} is recommended to identify
them as @sc{basic} programs.  If you don't use @file{/} at the
beginning of the name the file is relative to the directory where you
started @file{basic} from.

@node NEW, LOAD, SAVE, Program Management
@stindex @code{NEW}

To clear the current program from memory, use the @code{NEW} command.

You can also erase individual lines from the program by entering the
line number without any statements on it.

@node LOAD, Index, NEW, Program Management
@stindex @code{LOAD}

To load a previously saved program back into memory, use the
@code{LOAD} command with a string giving the name of the file
containing the program listing.  @sc{Basic} will read this file just
as if it were being typed into the console.  This means the file may
even contain unnumbered statements for immediate execution; for
example a program file may end with the line ``@code{RUN}'' to run the
program immediately after it finishes loading.

@cartouche
@example
LOAD "MyPrograms/example.basic"
@end example
@end cartouche

If you already have a program in memory, you may want to clear it
first with @code{NEW} before loading the new program; otherwise the
new code being loaded will be merged with any existing code.  This can
be useful for example if you have modifications to a program in a
separate file from the original code.  The sample program ``Animal''
is a good example of this; the game can be extended by adding more
@code{DATA} lines with additional questions and answers.

@cartouche
@example
NEW
LOAD "examples/Animal.BASIC"
LOAD "examples/Animal.more"
@end example
@end cartouche


@c To Do: document the TRACE command

@node Index, Index of Statements, , Top
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp

@node Index of Statements, Index of Functions, Index, Top
@unnumbered Index of Statements
@printindex st

@node Index of Functions, Index of Statements, , Top
@unnumbered Index of Functions
@printindex fn

@bye
